RFC: Per-Tenant GetPage@LSN Throttling (#5648)
neondatabase/neon: docs/rfcs/029-getpage-rate-limiting.md

So, there is no concurrent request processing within one connection/task.

There is a degree of natural pipelining:
Compute can "fill the pipe" by sending more than one GetPage request into the libpq TCP stream.
And Pageserver can fill the pipe with responses in the other direction.
Both directions are subject to the limit of tx/rx buffers, nodelay, TCP flow control, etc.

### GetPage@LSN Access Pattern

The Compute has its own hierarchy of caches, specifically `shared_buffers` and the `local file cache` (LFC).
Compute only issues GetPage requests to Pageserver if it encounters a miss in these caches.

If the working set stops fitting into Compute's caches, requests to Pageserver increase sharply -- the Compute starts *thrashing*.

## Motivation

In INC-69, a tenant issued 155k GetPage/second for a period of 10 minutes and 60k GetPage/second for a period of 3h,
then dropping to ca 18k GetPage/second for a period of 9h.

We noticed this because of an internal GetPage latency SLO burn rate alert, i.e.,
the request latency profile during this period significantly exceeded what was acceptable according to the internal SLO.

> Sadly, we do not have the observability data to determine the impact of this tenant on other tenants on the same tenants.

Reviewer: What metrics could help to investigate this?
buffer cache and file cache hit ratio, something else?

Author: IMO the same metrics you'd look for the vanilla-postgres smgr implementation.
I.e., classical block IO metrics.

Do you have an issue for this yet? If it's part of your plan for #5512  , please create one soon so we can link it in this RFC from the "future work" item "Compute-side metrics for GetPage latency."

However, here are some illustrative data points for the 155k period:
The tenant was responsible for >= 99% of the GetPage traffic and, frankly, the overall activity on this Pageserver instance.
We were serving pages at 10 GiB/s (`155k x 8 kbyte (PAGE_SZ) per second is 1.12GiB/s = 9.4Gb/s.`)
The CPU utilization of the instance was 75% user+system.
Pageserver page cache served 1.75M accesses/second at a hit rate of ca 90%.
The hit rate for materialized pages was ca. 40%.

> Curiously, IOPS to the Instance Store NVMe were very low, rarely exceeding 100.

Author: Yup. Can we close this conversation or do you want an amendment?
I think the previous lines already explain that the layers are cached.
I think it hurts clarity to re-explain that to the reader.

The compute was of type `k8s-pod`; hence, auto-scaling could/would not have helped remediate the thrashing by provisioning more RAM.
The consequence was that the **thrashing translated into excessive GetPage requests against Pageserver**.

My claim is that it was **unhealthy to serve this workload at the pace we did**:
* it is likely that other tenants were/would have experienced high latencies (again, we sadly don't have per-tenant latency data to confirm this)
* more importantly, it was **unsustainable** to serve traffic at this pace for multiple reasons:
    * **predictability of performance**: when the working set grows, the pageserver materialized page cache hit rate drops.
      At some point, we're bound by the EC2 Instance Store NVMe drive's IOPS limit.
      The result is an **uneven** performance profile from the Compute perspective.

    * **economics**: Neon currently does not charge for IOPS, only capacity.
      **We cannot afford to undercut the market in IOPS/$ this drastically; it leads to adverse selection and perverse incentives.**
      For example, the 155k IOPS, which we served for 10min, would cost ca. 6.5k$/month when provisioned as an io2 EBS volume.

>       Even the 18k IOPS, which we served for 9h, would cost ca. 1.1k$/month when provisioned as an io2 EBS volume.

Author: > I think there's a point to be made here that we're not trying to be EBS. We say we autoscale storage, and users could assume this to also include storage IO.

Fair point.

>       Even the 18k IOPS, which we served for 9h, would cost ca. 1.1k$/month when provisioned as an io2 EBS volume.

Author: > Note: Local attached disks are rated for 16k+ IOPS/disk when you get access to the full disk (assuming is4gen/im4gen is the standard), so this would have been quite dangerous if we were unable to use the OS's page cache.

Where is that 16k number from? And what do you mean by "full disk"?

On the i3en.3xlarge, we can definitely get a lot higher IOPS to the local NVMe.

>       Even the 18k IOPS, which we served for 9h, would cost ca. 1.1k$/month when provisioned as an io2 EBS volume.

Author: ```
admin@ip-172-31-13-23:[/mnt/fio]: fio --name pageserver-startup --bs=8k --size=20G  --rw=randread --direct=1 --runtime=10 --time_based=1 --group_reporting=1 --ioengine=io_uring --iodepth=128
pageserver-startup: (g=0): rw=randread, bs=(R) 8192B-8192B, (W) 8192B-8192B, (T) 8192B-8192B, ioengine=io_uring, iodepth=128
fio-3.25
Starting 1 process
Jobs: 1 (f=1): [r(1)][100.0%][r=1359MiB/s][r=174k IOPS][eta 00m:00s]
pageserver-startup: (groupid=0, jobs=1): err= 0: pid=1731284: Mon Dec 18 19:13:05 2023
  read: IOPS=174k, BW=1359MiB/s (1425MB/s)(13.3GiB/10001msec)
    slat (usec): min=2, max=377, avg= 5.08, stdev= 6.22
    clat (usec): min=44, max=3397, avg=730.03, stdev=219.39
     lat (usec): min=61, max=3415, avg=735.21, stdev=219.42
    clat percentiles (usec):
     |  1.00th=[  449],  5.00th=[  498], 10.00th=[  529], 20.00th=[  570],
     | 30.00th=[  603], 40.00th=[  635], 50.00th=[  668], 60.00th=[  717],
     | 70.00th=[  766], 80.00th=[  857], 90.00th=[ 1012], 95.00th=[ 1172],
     | 99.00th=[ 1516], 99.50th=[ 1680], 99.90th=[ 2040], 99.95th=[ 2180],
     | 99.99th=[ 2573]
   bw (  MiB/s): min= 1352, max= 1364, per=100.00%, avg=1360.11, stdev= 3.45, samples=19
   iops        : min=173108, max=174686, avg=174094.32, stdev=441.07, samples=19
  lat (usec)   : 50=0.01%, 100=0.01%, 250=0.01%, 500=5.07%, 750=61.96%
  lat (usec)   : 1000=22.37%
  lat (msec)   : 2=10.47%, 4=0.12%
  cpu          : usr=20.01%, sys=56.30%, ctx=191575, majf=0, minf=265
  IO depths    : 1=0.1%, 2=0.1%, 4=0.1%, 8=0.1%, 16=0.1%, 32=0.1%, >=64=100.0%
     submit    : 0=0.0%, 4=100.0%, 8=0.0%, 16=0.0%, 32=0.0%, 64=0.0%, >=64=0.0%
     complete  : 0=0.0%, 4=100.0%, 8=0.0%, 16=0.0%, 32=0.0%, 64=0.0%, >=64=0.1%
     issued rwts: total=1739945,0,0,0 short=0,0,0,0 dropped=0,0,0,0
     latency   : target=0, window=0, percentile=100.00%, depth=128

Run status group 0 (all jobs):
   READ: bw=1359MiB/s (1425MB/s), 1359MiB/s-1359MiB/s (1425MB/s-1425MB/s), io=13.3GiB (14.3GB), run=10001-10001msec

Disk stats (read/write):
  nvme1n1: ios=1721876/0, merge=0/0, ticks=1229031/0, in_queue=1229030, util=99.11%
```

## Solution: Limiting IOPS

**The consequence of the above analysis must be that Pageserver limits IOPS; unless we want to start charging for IOPS**.
Limiting IOPS sets the correct incentive to scale up computes (=> DRAM) to an adequate level for the given workload.
Neon makes this scaling Compute up and down exceptionally easy through Neon Autoscaling.

## The Design Space

What that remains is the question about *policy* and *mechanism*:

**Policy** concerns itself with the question of what limit applies to a given connection|timeline|tenant.
Candidates are:

* hard limit, same limit value per connection|timeline|tenant
    * Per-tenant will provide an upper bound for the impact of a tenant on a given Pageserver instance.
      This is a major operational pain point / risk right now.
* hard limit, configurable per connection|timeline|tenant
    * This outsources policy to console/control plane, with obvious advantages for flexible structuring of what service we offer to customers.
    * Note that this is not a mechanism to guarantee a *lower* bound of IOPS, i.e., to guarantee a certain QoS.
* fair share among active connections|timelines|tenants per instance

>     * example: divide available IOPS evenly among the tenants that were active in the last 5min

Author: Can you make a concrete GH review suggestion to this?

Since we're not aiming for anything "fair share"-like in this RFC, I don't want to spend more effort on that bullet point.

Its main purpose in this write-up is to illustrate the design space.

    * needs definition of "active", and knowledge of available IOPS in advance
* ...

Regarding **mechanism**, it's clear that **backpressure** is the way to go.

> However, we must choose between

Author: We decided on TCP-based implicit backpressure in today's meeting

https://github.com/neondatabase/neon/pull/5648/files/56e314dc4989526491972d325832c86921f5ba7e..2aeb3addccea68a4b1b507bbcbc9536a539acde7

* **implicit** backpressure through pq/TCP and

> * **explicit** rejection of requests + retries with exponential backoff

Author: We decided to do TCP-based implicit backpressure, reflected in recent commits https://github.com/neondatabase/neon/pull/5648/files/56e314dc4989526491972d325832c86921f5ba7e..2aeb3addccea68a4b1b507bbcbc9536a539acde7

      **We cannot afford to undercut the market in IOPS/$ this drastically; it leads to adverse selection and perverse incentives.**
      For example, the 155k IOPS, which we served for 10min, would cost ca. 6.5k$/month when provisioned as an io2 EBS volume.
      Even the 18k IOPS, which we served for 9h, would cost ca. 1.1k$/month when provisioned as an io2 EBS volume.
      We charge 0$.
      It could be economically advantageous to keep using a low-DRAM compute because Pageserver IOPS are fast enough and free.

Note: It is helpful to think of Pageserver as a disk, because it's precisely where `neon_smgr` sits:
vanilla Postgres gets its pages from disk, Neon Postgres gets them from Pageserver.
So, regarding the above performance & economic arguments, it is fair to say that we currently provide an "as-fast-as-possible-IOPS" disk that we charge for only by capacity.

## Solution: Limiting IOPS

**The consequence of the above analysis must be that Pageserver limits IOPS; unless we want to start charging for IOPS**.
Limiting IOPS sets the correct incentive to scale up computes (=> DRAM) to an adequate level for the given workload.

> Neon makes this scaling Compute up and down exceptionally easy through Neon Autoscaling.

Reviewer 2: > Limiting IOPS sets the correct incentive to scale up computes (=> DRAM)

Can you expand on this in the context of autoscaling? I don't see how this is the case, but I may be missing something.

Author: If you scale up DRAM then the Compute's caches are larger, hence less thrashing, hence less GetPage requests.

Does this clarify it for you?

Reviewer 2: Hm, I think I see what you mean. So I guess from the pageserver's perspective, this sets incentive for compute (team), but because we don't (yet) interpret thrashing as a signal to scale up, this signal won't be visible to users.

Author: Ok, so, we're on the same page.
How do you like this rephrasing:

```suggestion
Limiting IOPS sets the correct incentive for a thrashing Compute to scale up its DRAM to the working set size.
Neon Autoscaling will make this easy, [eventually](https://github.com/neondatabase/neon/pull/3913).
```
